[general]
name=AlphaEarth Toolbox
qgisMinimumVersion=3.34
qgisMaximumVersion=4.99
description=Load, visualise and analyse Google AlphaEarth Satellite Embedding V1 (64-band annual embeddings) inside QGIS — RGB visualisation, similarity search, multi-year change/trajectory, change reporting/charts, training-sample extraction and an optional scikit-learn tier (classify, classify over years, cluster, regress) — with no Earth Engine account.
about=AlphaEarth Satellite Embedding V1 is a global, 10 m, annual (2017–2025) 64-band learned embedding of the Earth's surface, licensed CC BY 4.0 and published as Cloud-Optimised GeoTIFFs in the public gs://alphaearth_foundations bucket, readable with no login. This toolbox packages that data as a QGIS Processing provider plus a guided tabbed dialog. "Load embedding" can fetch the tiles covering an area of interest straight from that public bucket given only a year — no URLs or sign-in. Each embedding pixel is a unit-length vector, so "find more like this" similarity search is an exact cosine dot product, and multi-year change is a direct pixel-to-pixel distance — the standout features no other AlphaEarth plugin offers. The no-dependency algorithms (Load, Load embeddings for multiple years, Embedding→RGB, Similarity, Change/trajectory, Change over years, Change report, Extract training samples) use only NumPy and GDAL, which ship with QGIS, so no extra Python packages are required. A "Change report" summarises any change raster as a report (distribution and summary statistics, percentage of area changed by threshold, an over-time series and a change-vs-embedding-band scatter) in any of four formats — HTML and CSV need nothing extra, while PNG and PDF use matplotlib when present and are skipped with a clear message when it is not. An optional scikit-learn tier adds supervised classification (with per-pixel confidence), a one-step "Classify over years" that fetches several years and maps land cover for each plus a first-to-last class transition and changed/unchanged mask, clustering and regression; the supervised and clustering algorithms can optionally tune their hyper-parameters (a cross-validated randomized search, or automatic k by silhouette), all opt-in. scikit-learn is not bundled — the toolbox detects it and offers a one-click install into the QGIS Python environment, and never fails to load without it. This release is experimental while real-QGIS coverage broadens. Not a substitute for field validation.
version=0.10.0
author=Stuart Barclay
email=stu_barclay@hotmail.com
tracker=https://github.com/StuBarclay/alphaearth_toolbox_qgis/issues
repository=https://github.com/StuBarclay/alphaearth_toolbox_qgis
homepage=https://github.com/StuBarclay/alphaearth_toolbox_qgis
category=Analysis
icon=icon.svg
license=GPL-2.0-or-later
experimental=True
deprecated=False
hasProcessingProvider=yes
tags=alphaearth,satellite embedding,embeddings,google,deep learning,land cover,classification,similarity,change detection,remote sensing,raster,cog,cloud optimised geotiff,australia
changelog=
    0.10.0 - Wizard parity for tuning and Classify over years. The guided dialog's Classify tab now exposes the two capabilities that previously lived only in the Processing Toolbox: an opt-in "Tune hyper-parameters" switch (with a tuning-iterations spinbox that enables only when the box is ticked) that drives the same cross-validated randomized search on the wizard's classification runs, and a "Fetch ticked years and classify" button that reuses the Load / Visualise tab's ticked years and extent to run "Classify over years" in one step — one model trained on the most recent ticked year (or reused from a saved .pkl) applied to every year, with optional first-to-last transition raster and changed/unchanged mask tick-boxes. No new algorithm or compute code: the tab collects parameters and delegates to the existing alphaearth:classify and alphaearth:classifyyears algorithms off the GUI thread, so behaviour cannot drift from the Processing entry points. Docs and the real-QGIS smoke-test checklist are updated to cover the new wizard controls, including a recordable manual test-log template; all four quality gates stay green.
    0.9.0 - A twelfth algorithm and optional hyper-parameter tuning for the ML tier. A new "Classify over years (fetch + classify)" is the classification analogue of "Change over years": tick two or more years, set one AOI, CRS and resolution, and it fetches every year onto the same snapped grid and maps land cover for each in one step — no intermediate per-year rasters to load and re-select by hand. One classifier is trained on the most recent ticked year (or a saved model is reused) and applied to every year, so the class codes mean the same thing across years; the outputs are a folder of per-year class rasters (classification_<year>.tif), an optional first-to-last transition raster (one colour per from/to class pair, auto-styled) and an optional changed/unchanged mask. It shares the fetch path with "Change over years" and reuses Classify's estimator-building, cross-validation and tuning helpers, so it cannot drift from either. Across the scikit-learn tier, Classify, Regress and the new Classify over years gain an opt-in "Tune hyper-parameters" switch — a cross-validated randomized search over a small preset grid for the random-forest/gradient-boosting estimator — and Cluster gains an opt-in "Choose k automatically" that picks the number of clusters by the best silhouette over a range; both are default-off, write their search summary into the same accuracy/report text, and fall back to the defaults (with a warning, never a failure) when the data is too small to score. All the new logic is pure NumPy/stdlib (transition encoding, changed mask, transition labels, grid sampling, best-selection and the randomized-search driver in aecore.ml) with its own unit tests plus a pure test of the shared tuning plumbing, and a QGIS-backed guard test asserts every tuning switch is off by default; all four quality gates stay green.
    0.8.0 - An eleventh algorithm and reports/charts for change. A new "Change report (chart / summary)" turns any single-band change raster (from "Change / trajectory" or "Change over years", or any magnitude raster) into a small report with independently selectable contents: a change-magnitude distribution with summary statistics (count, min/max, mean, median, std and percentiles) and a histogram; the percentage of the area changed at each of several thresholds (with hectares when the CRS is in metres); a change-over-time series from several change rasters supplied in order; and a scatter of change against a chosen embedding band. Any combination of four output formats can be written — a standalone HTML page with inline SVG charts and a CSV of the underlying numbers need nothing beyond NumPy, while PNG and PDF use matplotlib when it is present in the QGIS Python environment and are skipped with a clear message (never a failure) when it is not, exactly as the scikit-learn tier treats its optional dependency. The same report is offered as an opt-in extra on both change algorithms — set an output path on "Change / trajectory" or "Change over years" and the report (its over-time series taken from the consecutive-year pairs, its scatter against the most recent year) is written alongside the change raster — and the guided dialog's Change tab gains the matching content tick-boxes and HTML/PNG/CSV/PDF pickers driving both change runs. All of the report maths is a new pure-NumPy/stdlib core (aecore.report) with its own unit tests, so it is fully testable with no QGIS, GDAL or matplotlib present; the pure suite grows accordingly and all four quality gates stay green.
    0.7.0 - A tenth algorithm, model reuse, accuracy reporting, presets and a durable cache. A new "Change over years (fetch + compare)" algorithm folds "Load embeddings (multiple years)" and "Change / trajectory" into one step: tick two or more years, set one AOI, CRS and resolution, pick a change mode and metric, and get the change raster directly — every year is fetched onto the same snapped grid in one pass, so the years are inherently pixel-aligned and the per-year rasters can optionally still be saved. Classify and Regress can now save the fitted estimator to a .pkl and reuse it on another scene without retraining (the training layer is then unnecessary); the file is stamped with the scikit-learn version and 64-band count, and a mismatched reuse fails loudly. Both ML algorithms take an optional accuracy report: a stratified k-fold cross-validation writing overall accuracy, per-class precision/recall/F1 and a confusion matrix (Classify) or per-fold and overall R²/RMSE (Regress), plus a class-balance summary that warns on a heavily imbalanced training set. A curated preset library (RGB, similarity, clustering, change) is surfaced as dropdowns in the wizard. The per-(year, zone) tile listing, footprints and scene anchors can now be remembered across QGIS sessions via an opt-in "Remember the tile index across sessions" tick-box (stored under the QGIS profile; the default remains the temp-dir cache). New pure-NumPy/stdlib unit tests cover the presets, model-IO round-trip and stamping, cross-validation and class-balance maths, change-over-years year handling and the persistent-cache directory; a new QGIS-backed test suite (tests/test_algorithms_qgis.py) registers the provider in a headless QGIS and runs each offline algorithm end-to-end, skipping automatically where qgis.core is absent so it runs in the QGIS CI container and a live QGIS. The pure suite is now 207 passing tests; all four quality gates stay green.
    0.6.0 - Multi-year fetch over one area of interest. A new "Load embeddings (multiple years)" algorithm takes tick-boxes for the years you want (2017-2025) and fetches each one over the same AOI, CRS and resolution, writing one 64-band GeoTIFF per year (alphaearth_<year>.tif) into an output folder. Because every year lands on the identical snapped grid, the outputs are pixel-aligned and drop straight into "Change / trajectory" and "Similarity" with no re-projection. The guided dialog's Load tab gains a tick-list of years and a "Load selected years" button that adds each fetched raster to the project. The AOI/grid/UTM-zone setup and the large-AOI heads-up are computed once and reused across years, and each year has its own listing/footprint cache, so the per-year tile discovery, scene-grouped culling and mosaic are the exact same shared code path as the single-year loader (extracted into algorithms._fetch so the two cannot drift); each year takes an equal slice of the progress bar and Cancel is honoured between years. New pure-stdlib unit tests cover the year-index mapping (sort/dedup, out-of-range rejection) and per-year output naming.
    0.5.1 - Fewer remote reads on a first fetch (scene-grouped culling). A fetch-by-year run no longer header-scans every candidate tile: AlphaEarth object names encode only per-scene pixel offsets (each scene has its own origin), so tiles are now grouped by scene and one "anchor" tile per scene is read to over-estimate that scene's extent; scenes whose (deliberately generous) extent cannot touch the AOI are dropped without reading their tiles, and only the surviving scenes are scanned tile-by-tile for exact footprints — roughly one read per scene instead of one per tile on a first fetch, with no change to which tiles are ultimately selected. The per-(year, zone) listing and the scene anchors are also cached, so a later run over a different AOI in the same zone skips re-listing and re-anchors nothing. Tiles whose header cannot be read are now counted and reported as a single warning (the mosaic may have small gaps there) rather than passing silently. Concurrent header reads stay bounded to a small worker pool. New pure-stdlib unit tests cover scene parsing/grouping, the conservative over-estimate (proven to contain every tile under either pixel-axis orientation), and the listing/anchor caches.
    0.5.0 - Performance and memory hardening for large areas of interest. Public-GCS tile discovery — the slow first phase of a year fetch — now caches each (year, zone)'s tile footprints to a small JSON file (in WGS84, so the cache is reused whatever the run's target CRS is); AlphaEarth's annual data is immutable, so a repeat AOI over the same zones skips the remote header scan entirely and only ever reads footprints for tiles it has never seen. Embedding reads are float32 end-to-end: read_cube now returns float32 by default (lossless for the int8-quantised embeddings and half the RAM of float64), and the similarity, change, RGB, ML and sampling cores preserve that float32 through their maths instead of silently upcasting to float64. The "Load embedding" algorithm warns up front when a requested AOI is very large (rather than appearing to hang), and writes straight to a .tif/.tiff destination in a single pass, skipping the scratch-copy step. New GDAL-container tests cover the warp progress/cancel callback and the read/warp dtype controls. The year-fetch tile scan is also more robust: a single tile whose header cannot be read or transformed (a transient network fault or an edge tile, which under GDAL 3.9+ surfaces as an exception) is now skipped rather than aborting the whole run, and "Load embedding" writes the full underlying traceback to the Processing log on any unexpected failure instead of reporting only an opaque "Task failed".
    0.4.0 - Visualisation, an optional machine-learning tier and a guided wizard. "Embedding → RGB" paints a 64-band embedding to a 3-band preview, either as the top three PCA components (fitted on a pixel subsample) or a chosen band triplet, with a percentile contrast stretch. A new scikit-learn tier adds three algorithms: "Classify embedding" trains a random-forest or gradient-boosting classifier on labelled features and maps land cover across every valid pixel, optionally writing a per-pixel confidence (winning-class probability) raster; "Cluster embedding" runs unsupervised K-means (subsampled fit, chunked predict); "Regress embedding" predicts a continuous target (e.g. canopy height) from a numeric field. scikit-learn is never a hard dependency — it is detected at runtime and, when missing, the tool stops with a clear message and a one-click install into the QGIS Python environment. The dialog is now a tabbed wizard (Load/Visualise, Classify, Similarity, Change) with a draw-on-canvas extent, year picker, target-CRS chooser and an Install scikit-learn button; every run executes off the GUI thread via a background task with a progress bar and Cancel, and outputs auto-load into the project. Pure-NumPy ML core (aecore.ml) and sklearn detection are unit-tested; new GDAL round-trip/parity tests run in the QGIS/GDAL CI container, which now also exercises a QGIS 4 (Qt6) image.
    0.3.0 - Two new no-dependency algorithms. "Change / trajectory" compares two or more already-loaded embedding years (one per year, on a shared grid) and maps per-pixel change by cosine or Euclidean distance, in three modes: pairwise (first vs last), trajectory magnitude (cumulative distance across the sequence) and anomaly vs baseline (latest year vs the multi-year mean); the output is auto-styled blue→red. "Extract training samples" samples the embedding vector at point/polygon features and writes one point row per covered pixel — carrying the source attributes as labels plus band columns A00…A63 — ready to export to CSV for external ML or QA. Both are pure NumPy over GDAL, with new unit-tested compute cores (aecore.change, aecore.sampling).
    0.2.0 - "Load embedding" can now fetch straight from the public AlphaEarth GCS bucket (gs://alphaearth_foundations) given only a year: the AOI is reprojected to WGS84 to pick the UTM-zone folders, each zone is listed via the public GCS JSON API, tile footprints are header-scanned concurrently to keep only those overlapping the AOI, and the survivors (which may span several UTM-zone CRSs) are mosaicked in one warp and de-quantised (÷127.5) back to unit-length vectors. No sign-in, API key or billing project. GDAL tuned for HTTP/2 multi-range reads; new pure-stdlib tile-discovery helpers with injected-fetch unit tests.
    0.1.0 - Initial scaffold. Processing provider "AlphaEarth Toolbox" with two no-dependency algorithms: "Load embedding" clips/warps a 64-band AlphaEarth source (a raster layer or a /vsicurl COG URL) to an area of interest, CRS and resolution; "Similarity search" turns seed points/polygons into a per-pixel cosine-similarity raster (0–1) and an optional threshold mask, using AlphaEarth's unit-vector format for an exact dot-product similarity. Pure-NumPy compute core with unit tests; dialog GUI stub; reproducible ZIP builder and CI. No extra Python packages required.
